## Chapter 4
# Self-Knowledge

The problems of the world are so colossal, so very complex, that to understand
and so to resolve them one must approach them in a very simple and direct
manner; and simplicity, directness, do not depend on outward circumstances nor
on our particular prejudices and moods. As I was pointing out, our solution is
not to be found through conferences, blue-prints, or through the substitution of
new leaders for old, and so on. The solution obviously lies in the creator of
the problem, in the creator of the mischief, of the hate and of the enormous
misunderstanding that exists between human beings. The creator of this mischief,
the creator of these problems is the individual, you and I, not the world as we
think of it. The world is your relationship with another. The world is not
something separate from you and me; the world, society, is the relationship that
we establish or seek to establish between each other.

So you and I are the problem, and not the world, because the world is the
projection of ourselves and to understand the world we must understand
ourselves. The world is not separate from us, we are the world, and our problems
are the world's problems. This cannot be repeated too often, because we are so
sluggish in our mentality that we think the world's problems are not our
business, that they have to be resolved by the United Nations or by substituting
new leaders for the old. It is a very dull mentality that thinks like that,
because we are responsible for this frightful misery and confusion in the world,
this ever-impending war. To transform the world, we must begin with ourselves;
and what is important in beginning with ourselves is the intention. The
intention must be to understand ourselves and not to leave it to others to
transform themselves or to bring about a modified change through revoltion,
either of the left or of the right. It is important to understand that this is
our responsibility, yours and mine; because, however small may be the world we
live in, if we can transform ourselves, bring about a radically different point
of view in our daily existence, then perhaps we shall affect the world at large,
the extended relationship with others.

As I said, we are going to try and find out the process of understanding
ourselves, which is not an isolating process. it is not withdrawal from the
world, because you cannot live in isolatin. To be is to be related, and there is
no such thing as living in isolation. It is the lack of right relationship that
brings about conflicts, misery and strife; however small our world may be, if we
can transform our relationship in that narrow world, it will be like a wave
extending outward all the time. I think it is important to see that point, that
the world is our relationship, however narrow; and if we can bring a
tranformation there, not a superficial but a radical transformation, then we
shall begin actively to transform the world. Real revolution is not according to
any particular pattern, either of the left or of the right, but it is a
revolution of values, a revolution from sensate values to the values that are
not sensate or created by environmental influences. To find these true values
which will bring about a radical revolution, a transformation or a regeneration,
it is essential to understand oneself. Self-knowledge is the beginning of
wisdom, and therefore the beginning of transformation or regeneration. To
understand oneself there must be the intention to understand&mdash;and that is
where our difficulty comes in. Although most of us are discontented, we desire
to bring about a sudden change, our discontent is canalized merely to achieve a
certain result; being discontented, we either seek a different job or merely
succomb to environment. Discontent, instead of setting us aflame, causing us to
question life, the whole process of existence, is canalized, and thereby we
become mediocre, losing that drive, that intensity to find out the whole
significance of existence. Therefore it is important to discover these things
for ourselves, because self-knowledge cannot be given to us by another, it is
not to be found through any book. We must discover, and to discover there must
be the intention, the search, the inquiry. So long as that intention to find
out, to inquire deeply, is weak or does not exist, mere assertion or a casual
wish to find out about oneself is of very little significance.

Thus the transformation of the world is brought about by the transformation of
oneself, because the self is the product and a part of the total process of
human existence. To transform oneself, self-knowledge is essential; without
knowing what you are, there is no basis for right thought, and without knowing
yourself there cannot be transformation. One must know oneself as one is, not as
one wishes to be which is merely an ideal and therefore fictitious, unreal;
it is only that which *is* that can be transformed, not that which you wish to
be. to know oneself as one is requires an extraordinary alertness of mind,
because what *is* is continuously undergoing transformation, change, and to
follow it swiftly the mind must not be tethered to any particular dogma or
belief, to any particular pattern of action. If you would follow anything it is
no good being tethered. To know yourself, there must be the awareness, the
alertness of mind in which there is freedom from all beliefs, from all
idealization because beliefs and ideals only give you a colour, perverting true
perception. If you want to know what you are you cannot imagine or have belief
in something which you are not. If I am greedy, envious, violent, merely having
an ideal of non-violence, of non-greed, is of little value. But to know that one
is greedy or violent, to know and understand it, requires an extraordinary
perception, does it not? It demands honesty, clarity of thought, whereas to
pursue an ideal away from what *is* is an escape; it prevents you from
discovering and acting directly upon what you are.

The understanding of what you are, whatever it may be&mdash;ugly or beautiful,
wicked or mischievous&mdash;the understanding of what you are, without
distortion, is the beginning of virtue. Virtue is essential, for it gives
freedom. It is only in virtue that you can discover, that you can live&mdash;not
in the *cultivation* of a virtue, which merely brings about respectability not
understanding and freedom. There is a difference between being virtuous and
becoming virtuous. Being virtuous comes through the understanding of what is,
whereas becoming virtuous is postponement, the covering up of what *is* with
what you would like to be. Therefore in becoming virtuous you are avoiding
action directly upon what *is*. This process of avoiding what *is* through the
cultivation of the ideal is considered virtuous; but if you look at it closely
and directly you will see that it is nothing of the kind. It is merely a
postponement of coming face to face with what *is*. Virtue is not the becoming
of what is not; virtue is the understanding of what *is* and therefore the
freedom from what *is*. Virtue is essential in a society that is rapidly
disintegrating. In order to create a new world, a new structure away from the
old, there must be freedom to discover; and to be free, there must be virtue,
for without virtue there is no freedom. Can the immoral man who is striving to
become virtuous ever know virtue? The man who is not moral can never be free,
and therefore he can never find out what reality is. Reality can be found only
in understanding what *is*; and to understand what *is*, there must be freedom,
freedom from the fear of what *is*.

To understand that process there must be the intention to know what is, to
follow every thought, feeling and action; and to understand what *is* is
extremely difficult, because what *is* is never still, never static, it is
always in movement. The what *is* is what you are, not what you would like to
be; it is not the ideal, because the ideal is fictitious, but it is actually
what you are doing, thinking and feeling from moment to moment. What *is* is the
actual, and to understand the actual requires awareness, a very alert, swift
mind. But if we begin to condemn what *is*, if we begin to blame or resist it,
then we shall not understand its movement. If I want to understand somebody, I
cannot condemn him: I must observe, study him. I must love the very thing I am
studying. If you want to understand a child, you must love and not condemn
him. You must play with him, watch his movements, his idiosyncrasies, his ways
of behaviour; but if you merely condemn, resist or blame him, there is no
comprehension of the child. Similarly, to understand what *is*, one must observe
what one thinks, feels and does from moment to moment. That is the actual. Any
other action, any ideal or ideological action, is not the actual; it is merely a
wish, a fictitious desire to be something other than what *is*.

To understand what *is* requires a state of mind in which there is no
identification or condemnation, which means a mind that is alert and yet
passive. 
